# Software Engineering Review

软件工程复习，2025年一月，2211030

平时50%，期末50%

- 选择，80分
- 简答，1题20分，英文回答



软件的三个重要组成要素：Instructions, Data structures, Documentations

**What is Software?**

•*Software is developed or engineered it is not* *manufactured* *in the classical sense.**不是工厂*

•*Software doesn't "**wear out**“ but i**t* *does deteriorate.**生命周期、变坏*

•*Although the industry is moving toward component-based construction, most software continues to be* *custom-built**.**定制化*

***Why must software change?***

•Software must be *adapted* to meet the needs of new computing environments or technology, e.g. cloud computing

•Software must be *enhanced* to implement new business requirements, e.g. e-commerce

•Software must be *extended* to make it interoperable with other more modern systems or databases, e.g. AI framework

•Software must be *re-architected* to make it viable within a network environment, e.g. data center virtualization

**Software Engineering Layers**

- Tools
- Methods
- Process
- Aquality focus

**Process Framework Activities**

- Communication
- Planning
- Modeling
- Construction
- Deployment

**Essenceof Software Engineering Practice**

1. *Understand the problem* (communication and analysis).
2. *Plan a solution* (modeling and software design).
3. *Carry out the plan* (code generation).
4. *Examine result for accuracy* (testing & quality assurance).



**Process Flow 有哪些**

1. Linear process flow
2. Interactive process flow  迭代
3. Evolutionary process flow  进化
4. Parallel process flow

**Process Model 有哪些**

1. Waterfall Process Model  瀑布模型
   1. 以线性、顺序的方式完成每个阶段，每个阶段都有明确的目标和输出，并且需要完成当前阶段后才能进入下一阶段。
   2. 用户只能在开发结束后看到最终产品，缺乏灵活性，难以应对需求的变化
2. Prototyping Process Model  原型模型
   1. 用户可以参与开发过程，提高需求准确性。
   2. 通过快速构建系统原型，与用户交互和验证需求。
3. Spiral Process Model  螺旋模型
4. Unified Process Model  统一过程模型



**Agility  敏捷开发**

- Effective (rapid and adaptive) response to change.
- Effective communication among all stakeholders.
- Drawing the customer onto the team.
- Organizing a team so that it is in control of the work performed. 有控制权
- Rapid, incremental delivery of software.  叠加式的交付

**What is an Agile Process?**

- Driven by customer descriptions of what is required (scenarios).  完全基于客户需求
- Customer feedback is frequent and acted on.  反馈
- Recognizes that plans are short-lived.
- Develops software iteratively with a heavy emphasis on construction activities.
- Delivers multiple ‘software increments’ as executable prototypes.  阶段性交付原型
- Adapts as project or technical changes occur.  适应性、灵活性强

**Scrum Details  敏捷开发的详细信息**

- Backlog Refinement Meeting  待办事项优化会议
- Sprint Planning Meeting  简短快速的计划会议
- Daily Scrum Meeting 
- Sprint Review 
- Sprint Retrospective 

**Framework**

- Scrum Framework
- Extreme Programming (XP) Framework
- Kanban Framework



**Characteristics of Agile Process Models**

1. Not suitable for large high-risk or mission critical projects.
2. Minimal rules and minimal documentation.
3. Continuous involvement of testers.
4. Easy to accommodate product changes.
5. Depends heavily on stakeholder interaction.
6. Easy to manage.
7. Early delivery of partial solutions.
8. Informal risk management.
9. Built-in continuous process improvement.

**Incremental Model for Prototype Design  原型迭代**

**Spiral Model for Prototype Design  原型 循环的叠加**

**First Prototype Guidelines** **指导原则**

1. Transition from paper prototype to software design.
2. Prototype a user interface.
3. Create a virtual prototype.
4. Add input and output to your prototype.
5. Engineer your algorithms.
6. Test your prototype.
7. Prototype with deployment in mind.

**Prototype Evaluation**

1. Provide scaffolding when asking for prototype feedback.
2. Test your prototype on the right people.
3. Ask the right questions.
4. Be neutral when presenting alternatives to users.
5. Adapt while testing.
6. Allow the user to contribute ideas.

**Software Release Maintenance  软件发布维护**

- Maintenance
- Corrective maintenance  改正
- Adaptive maintenance  适配
- Perfective maintenance  改善
- Preventive maintenance  预防性维护



**Traits of Successful Software Engineers**

- Sense of individual responsibility.
- Acutely aware of the needs of team members and stakeholders（用户、公司决策者）.
- Brutally honest about design flaws and offers constructive criticism.
- Resilient under pressure.  在压力下具有弹性
- Heightened sense of fairness.
- Attention to detail.
- Pragmatic adapting software engineering practices based on the circumstances at hand.  根据手头的情况，务实地调整软件工程实践

**Effective Software** **Team Attributes**

- Sense of purpose. 使命感
- Sense of involvement.  参与感
- Sense of trust.
- Sense of improvement.
- Diversity of team member skill sets.  多样化

**Agile Teams** **敏捷团队**



**Principles** **that Guide Process** 

1. Be agile.
2. Focus on qualty at every step.
3. Be ready to adapt.
4. Build an effectivee team.
5. Establish mechanisms for communication and coordination.  建立沟通协调机制
6. Manage change.  管理变化
7. Assess risk.  评估风险
8. Create work products that provide value for others.



**Requirements Engineering  需求工程** 

**Non-functional Requirements  非功能需求**

**UML（Unified Modeling Language，统一建模语言）图**是一种标准化的图形语言，用于建模软件系统的结构和行为。



**Requirements Models**

- **Scenario-based models**  基于场景
- **Class-oriented models**  面向类
- **Behavioral models**  基于行为
- **Data models**  基于数据
- **Flow-oriented models**  面向流

State Diagram 状态图、Activity Diagram 动作图、Swimlane Diagram 泳道图



**Mapping Requirements Model to Design Model  将需求模型映射到设计模型**

- Component-Level Design  模块设计
- Interface Design  接口设计
- Architectural Design  系统架构设计
- Data/Class Design

**Design Concepts**

- Abstraction  抽象
- Architecture  架构
- Design Patterns  设计模式
- Separation of concerns  关注点分离
- Modularity  模块化
- •Information Hiding  信息隐藏
- Functional independence  功能独立性
- Stepwise Refinement  逐步细化
- Refactoring  重构
- Design Classes  设计类

==**Design Class Characteristics  设计类特征**==

- Complete  完整
- Primitiveness  颗粒感
- High cohesion  高内聚
- Low coupling  低耦合



**Architectural Styles**

Each style describes a system category that encompasses:

1. **set of components** (for example: a database, computational modules) that perform a function required by a system.
2. **set of connectors** that enable “communication, coordination and cooperation” among components.
3. **constraints** that define how components can be integrated to form the system.
4. **semantic models (语义模型)** that enable a designer to understand the overall properties of a system by analyzing the known properties of its constituent parts. 

**Layered Architecture  层次化架构**

**Architectural Considerations**

- **Economy** – software is uncluttered and relies on abstraction to reduce unnecessary detail. 
- **Visibility** – Architectural decisions and their justifications should be obvious to software engineers who review.
- **Spacing** – Separation of concerns in a design without introducing hidden dependencies.
- **Symmetry** – Architectural symmetry implies that a system is consistent and balanced in its attributes.
- **Emergence** – Emergent, self-organized behavior and control are key to creating scalable, efficient, and economic software architectures.



//10 finish  11 start
